---
title: Metricon 8
author: Pete Lindstrom, Jennifer Bayuk and Andrew Jaquith
created_at: 2012-12-11 18:45:08 -0500
layout: post
categories:
- metricon
comments: true
---

Metricon 8 will be a one-day event co-located with the 2013 RSA Conference in San Francisco, CA. The chair for Metricon 8 is [Pete Lindstrom](mailto:petelind@spiresecurity.com). Please feel free to reach out to Pete and share your ideas and interests.

<!-- more -->

## Call for Participation

In our continuing efforts to infuse the infosec field with useful metrics, we are excited to announce Metricon 8 - an all-day metrics workshop on Friday, March 1, 2013! 

Metricon 8 has a workshop-like format - complete with objectives - that will ultimately lead to a lasting contribution to our field. We sincerely believe that leveraging the collective wisdom of participants will lead us to a taxonomy or framework for metrics in areas that are important to enterprise security programs. Even more specifically, our approach will incorporate an evaluation of existing industry data sources (e.g. published reports) with an eye toward identifying alignments, gaps, and overlaps as these reports relate to the needs of the enterprise security professional.

<!-- more -->

The format for the workshop will include breakouts and full-group sessions as we move towards our objectives. We will ultimately cover 3-6 of the following subject areas, keeping in mind our enterprise interests as they dovetail with published reports:
  
* Incident-oriented Metrics (sources, e.g. DBIR, Trustwave, Mandiant)
* Malware-oriented Metrics (sources, e.g. most/all anti-malware companies)
* AppSec-oriented Metrics (sources, e.g. Veracode, Whitehat, OWASP)
* Vulnerability and System Config Metrics (sources e.g. MSFT, IBM)
* Risk and/or Compliance Metrics (sources e.g. Vz PCI Report, Index of Cybersecurity)
* Process / Management / Resource Metrics (sources e.g. NIST/GAO, various)
* Other enterprise-oriented Metrics (help us out!)
 
Note: We will be leaning heavily towards recurring data reports rather than ad hoc empirical studies.

All prospective participants with an interest in security metrics are welcome. However, given the maturity level of most of our members and our intended objectives, the content will be oriented towards "seasoned" professionals.  

It is crucial that we get a good sense up-front about participants, given our move to Friday of RSA, and the change in conference format. Get your name on the list now! There is no cost to participate.

We invite you to submit your request to participate via email to [Metricon 8 @ securitymetrics.org](mailto:metricon8@securitymetrics.org?subject=Request%20to%20participate&body=I'd%20like%20to%20attend%20Metricon%208). Please include the following:
 
1. Your name and affiliation  
2. Three topic areas that are of interest in prioritized order (from list above or add your own)
3. Anticipated level of participation (heavy, moderate, light, observer)
4. A brief statement about your interest in security metrics

We are also very interested in regrets or disinterest along with the reason why.

We hope you are as excited as we are in contributing to the growing body of practical knowledge in our field.

## Program Committee

* Pete Lindstrom, chair
* Gunnar Peterson
* Chris Porter
* Bob Rudis
* Walt Williams
* Andrew Jaquith
* Dan Geer
* Jennifer Bayuk
 
Additional program committee members are expected to follow.
 
Please feel free to contact any member of the program committee with questions and concerns, or email the chair at: `petelind@spiresecurity.com`.