---
title: Metricon 9 — Call for Papers
author: Bob Rudis
created_at: 2013-11-25 22:20:22 -0500
layout: post
categories:
- news
- metricon
comments: true
---
__Call for Papers for Metricon 9__

Metricon is the annual conference dedicated to security metrics. We are excited to announce Metricon 9 — an all-day metrics workshop. We invite practitioners to present practical and novel  approaches for measuring information security effectiveness. 

__When__: Friday, February 28, 2014 (the Friday of RSA); All day event

__Where__: Near or at RSA; specific location TBD

__Theme__: *Behind the Curtains: From Data to Insight*
 
<!-- more -->

# Attending

Metricon is free to attend, but conditional upon review of the program committee. Space is limited. Catered lunch will be provided.

If you wish to attend Metricon 9, please send an e-mail to
`metricon9@securitymetrics.org` with your:

- Name
- Employer or educational institutuion
- Title or degree being pursued
- Preferred e-mail address
- Your area(s) of interest in security metrics and/or links to past work

# Presenting

*25 minute or 50 minute sessions available*

Discuss a data-centric approach to information security, either a one-shot analysis of an interesting problem or long-term use of data and metrics to drive decisions. We're especially interested in having security firms that produce regular public reports or organizational security programs taking us "behind the curtain" to see and learn from your journey from data to
insight.

- What was the goal of your research/project/task?
- Where did data come from? What challenges did data collection, preparation, and storage offer and how were those addressed?
- What type of analysis was done on the data and how was this presented to others? Any recommended tools or lessons learned here?
- What insight or action did this work drive?
- What was the feedback around this effort and how would you approach it next time?

Please send the following to `metricon9@securitymetrics.org`:

1. Your name/full contact info
2. A short abstract (300-400 characters) about your talk, which will serve as the public description of your topic
3. A long description (400+ but don’t go crazy) which will only be seen by the selection committee on how you will address the bullet points above
4. 3-5 learning points on what you’d hope audience members would take away from your presentation.
5. Your preference for a 25-minute or a 50-minute session

# Firetalks!

There will be an opportunity to showcase your security-oriented, data-driven research & visualization projects as a 5-minute "fire talk."

If you wish to submit a fire talk proposal, please provide the following to `metricon9@securitymetrics.org`:

1. Your name/full contact info
2. A short abstract (300-400 characters) describing what you will be covering in your fire talk
3. [OPTIONAL] A copy of a paper, link to a paper or link to your active research project

# CFP Logistics

- CFP Open: Now
- CFP Closes: January 6th, 2014
- CFP Acceptance Notices Delivered: January 13th, 2014

All Metricon 9 questions/comments should be directed to `metricon9@securitymetics.org` or Bob Rudis ( `bob` [at] `rudis` [dot] `net`) or Jay Jacobs ( `jay` [at] `beechplane` [dot] `com`).